Instructions
About the Project

The Intelligent Loan Approval System is an end-to-end Machine Learning project that predicts whether a loan application should be approved or rejected based on an applicant's financial, personal, employment, and credit-related information. The project demonstrates the complete machine learning workflow, from data preprocessing and exploratory data analysis to model training, evaluation, and prediction.

Repository Contents

This repository includes:

Historical loan application dataset
Jupyter Notebook with complete implementation
Data preprocessing pipeline
Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)
Data visualizations
Feature engineering
Machine Learning model
Project documentation
Requirements file
Requirements

Before running the project, ensure the following software and libraries are installed:

Python 3.10 or later
Jupyter Notebook
NumPy
Pandas
Matplotlib
Seaborn
Scikit-learn

Install all required libraries using:

pip install -r requirements.txt
How to Run the Project
Clone or download this repository.
Install all required dependencies using the requirements.txt file.
Ensure the dataset is available in the correct project directory.
Open Intelligent_Loan_Approval_System.ipynb using Jupyter Notebook.
Run all notebook cells sequentially from top to bottom.
Project Workflow

The project follows the steps below:

Import the required Python libraries.
Load the loan application dataset.
Explore and understand the dataset.
Clean the data and handle missing values.
Perform Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA).
Visualize important patterns and relationships.
Apply feature engineering and data preprocessing techniques.
Encode categorical variables.
Split the dataset into training and testing sets.
Train the Machine Learning model.
Evaluate the model using appropriate performance metrics.
Predict loan approval for new applicants.
Project Objective

The objective of this project is to develop a Machine Learning model that learns patterns from historical loan application data and predicts whether a new applicant is likely to receive loan approval. The system is designed to support faster, more consistent, and data-driven decision-making in the loan approval process.

Disclaimer

This project was developed for educational and portfolio purposes. The banking institution, dataset, and business scenario are fictional and were created solely to demonstrate practical Machine Learning, Data Analysis, Feature Engineering, Model Development, and Classification techniques through a complete end-to-end workflow.